.\" micron - a minimal cron implementation  -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2020-2021 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" Micron is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
.\" Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
.\" option) any later version.
.\"
.\" Micron is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with micron. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>. */
.TH CRONTAB 1 "January 18, 2021" "CRONTAB" "General Commands Manual"
.SH NAME
crontab \- manipulate per-user and user-group crontabs 
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcrontab\fR\
 [\fB\-i\fR]\
 [\fB\-u \fINAME\fR]\
 \fIFILE\fR
.br
\fBcrontab\fR\
 [\fB\-eilr\fR]\
 [\fB\-u \fINAME\fR]
.br
\fBcrontab\fR\
 \fB\-g\
 [\fB\-u \fINAME\fR]\
 [\fB\-eilr\fR]\
 \fIFILE\fR
.br
\fBcrontab\fR \fB\-h\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
Allows the user to list, edit or remove personal or group crontabs.
.PP
The \fBmicrond\fR(8) cron daemon reads crontabs from several crontab
groups, two of which contain crontabs for particular system users.
The \fBuser crongroup\fR contains per-user crontabs, and the \fBgroup
crongroup\fR contains user crontabs editable by a group of users (see
the
.BR micrond (8)
manual page for details).  By default, \fBcrontab\fR operates on
per-user crontabs.  To edit group crontabs, the \fB\-g\fR option must
be specifed.
.PP
When run without arguments, \fBcrontab\fR enters \fIcopy mode\fR, in
which it copies the content of the supplied \fIFILE\fR to the user
personal crontab, overwriting its prior content.
.PP
To list the content of the crontab, use the \fB\-l\fR option.  It will
be displayed on standard output.
.PP
To edit it, run \fBcrontab\fR with the \fB\-e\fR option.  A temporary
copy of the crontab will be created and loaded to the editor specified
by the \fBVISUAL\fR environment variable.  If it is unset, the
\fBEDITOR\fR variable is consulted.  If this variable is unset, the
built-in setting (\fBvi\fR) will be used.
.PP
Once you quit the editor, the edited crontab will be atomically moved to
your personal crontab, which will be re-read by \fBmicrond\fR.
.PP
The \fB\-r\fR option removes the crontab.
.PP
The super-user can address the crontab of a particular user by
supplying the user's login name with the \fB\-u\fR option.  The use of
this option is restricted for super-user, except if used together with
the \fB\-g\fR option (see below).
.PP
When using destructive operations (such as copying or removal), it is
safer to use the \fB\-i\fR option which instructs the program to ask
for the user consent before undertaking the modification.
.PP
User crontab groups contain multiple files for each system user.  They
are useful for certain pseudo-accounts.  For example, a site running
multiple web services may need to install separate crontabs for each
of them and to allow users who run these services to edit their
crontabs.  This is done using the \fB\-g\fR option.  The name of the
account for which the crontab is edited is supplied with the \fB\-u\fR
option.  For example, to edit a crontab ``portal'' in account
``www-data'', one would use:
.PP
    crontab -g -u www-data -e portal
.PP    
The use of group crontabs for account \fIX\fR is allowed only for
users who are members of the primary group of \fIX\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-e
Edit crontab.
.TP
.B \-i
Interactively ask before removing or replacing.
.TP
.B \-l
List crontab content.  When used with the \fB\-g\fR option, this
option lists the content of the crontab \fIFILE\fR in the group.  If
\fIFILE\fR is not supplied, displays the list of available crontabs in
the group, along with their owners.
.TP
.B \-r
Remove crontab.
.TP
.B \-g
Operate on user cron group files.
.TP
\fB\-u \fINAME\fR
Operate on crontab of user \fINAME\fR.
.TP
.B \-v
Print program version, licensing information and exit.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR micrond (8),
.BR crontab (5).
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2020 Sergey Poznyakoff <gray@gnu.org>
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:
